Ludwig von Mises
The Austrian economist Ludwig von Mises argued in his 1922 book Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis that the Soviet system was unsustainable and would eventually collapse. This book was published months before Lenin implemented the New Economic Policy reintroducing partial private property in agriculture. Mises' analysis was based on the economic calculation problem, a critique of central planning first outlined in 1920 journal articles. His argument was that the Soviet Union would find itself increasingly unable to set correct prices for the goods and services it produced:

We may admit that in its initial period a socialist regime could to some extent rely on the preceding age of capitalism [for the purpose of determining prices]. But what is to be done later, as conditions change more and more? Of what use could the prices of 1900 be for the director in 1949? And what use can the director in 1989 derive from knowledge of the prices of 1949?

Leon Trotsky
One of the founders of the USSR, later expelled by Joseph Stalin, Leon Trotsky devoted much of his time in exile to the question of the Soviet Union's future. In time, he came to believe that a new revolution was necessary to depose the nomenklatura and reinstate working class rule as the first step to socialism. In 1936 he made the following prediction:

In order better to understand the character of the present Soviet Union, let us make two different hypotheses about its future. Let us assume first that the Soviet bureaucracy is overthrown by a revolutionary party having all the attributes of the old Bolshevism, enriched moreover by the world experience of the recent period. Such a party would begin with the restoration of democracy in the trade unions and the Soviets. It would be able to, and would have to, restore freedom of Soviet parties. Together with the masses, and at their head, it would carry out a ruthless purgation of the state apparatus. It would abolish ranks and decorations, all kinds of privileges, and would limit inequality in the payment of labor to the life necessities of the economy and the state apparatus. It would give the youth free opportunity to think independently, learn, criticize and grow. It would introduce profound changes in the distribution of the national income in correspondence with the interests and will of the worker and peasant masses. But so far as concerns property relations, the new power would not have to resort to revolutionary measures. It would retain and further develop the experiment of planned economy. After the political revolution—that is, the deposing of the bureaucracy—the proletariat would have to introduce in the economy a series of very important reforms, but not another social revolution.

If—to adopt a second hypothesis—a bourgeois party were to overthrow the ruling Soviet caste, it would find no small number of ready servants among the present bureaucrats, administrators, technicians, directors, party secretaries and privileged upper circles in general. A purgation of the state apparatus would, of course, be necessary in this case too. But a bourgeois restoration would probably have to clean out fewer people than a revolutionary party. The chief task of the new power would be to restore private property in the means of production. First of all, it would be necessary to create conditions for the development of strong farmers from the weak collective farms, and for converting the strong collectives into producers' cooperatives of the bourgeois type into agricultural stock companies. In the sphere of industry, denationalization would begin with the light industries and those producing food. The planning principle would be converted for the transitional period into a series of compromises between state power and individual "corporations"—potential proprietors, that is, among the Soviet captains of industry, the émigré former proprietors and foreign capitalists. Notwithstanding that the Soviet bureaucracy has gone far toward preparing a bourgeois restoration, the new regime would have to introduce in the matter of forms of property and methods of industry not a reform, but a social revolution.

Let us assume to take a third variant – that neither a revolutionary nor a counterrevolutionary party seizes power. The bureaucracy continues at the head of the state. Even under these conditions social relations will not jell. We cannot count upon the bureaucracy's peacefully and voluntarily renouncing itself in behalf of socialist equality. If at the present time, notwithstanding the too obvious inconveniences of such an operation, it has considered it possible to introduce ranks and decorations, it must inevitably in future stages seek supports for itself in property relations. One may argue that the big bureaucrat cares little what are the prevailing forms of property, provided only they guarantee him the necessary income. This argument ignores not only the instability of the bureaucrat's own rights, but also the question of his descendants. The new cult of the family has not fallen out of the clouds. Privileges have only half their worth, if they cannot be transmitted to one's children. But the right of testament is inseparable from the right of property. It is not enough to be the director of a trust; it is necessary to be a stockholder. The victory of the bureaucracy in this decisive sphere would mean its conversion into a new possessing class. On the other hand, the victory of the proletariat over the bureaucracy would insure a revival of the socialist revolution. The third variant consequently brings us back to the two first, with which, in the interests of clarity and simplicity, we set out.[10]

World War II
In 1941 Adolf Hitler of Nazi Germany decided to attack the Soviet Union (Operation Barbarossa). In June 1941 the German Wehrmacht and other Axis military forces invaded the Soviet Union, and the Red Army retreated.
After graduating M.A., Chambre visited Italy, studied medicine there, and graduated at the University of Padua. On his return became physician to Henry VII of England, and retained the position under Henry VIII. He received the degree of M.D. at Oxford in 1531.[1]

When the College of Physicians was founded in 1518, Chambre was the first named in its charter. He was censor of the College of Physicians in 1523. Some of his prescriptions for lotions and plasters were preserved in manuscript, and a letter signed by him on the health of Queen Jane Seymour.[1]

Church career
In 1508 Chambre was given the living of Bowden in Leicestershire, from 1494 to 1509 he held the prebend of Codringham in Lincoln Cathedral, and from 1509 to 1549 that of Leighton Buzzard there; and in the same diocese, as then constituted, he held the archdeaconry of Bedford from 1525 to 1549. He was also treasurer of Wells 1510 to 1543, and in 1537 canon of Wiveliscombe; he was precentor of Exeter 1524 to 1549, canon of Windsor 1509 to 1549, Archdeacon of Meath 1540 to 1542, and dean of the collegiate chapel of St. Stephen's, Westminster.[1]
Born in London but brought up in Glasgow, Paterson was on the books of both Rangers and Queen's Park as an amateur, whilst training as a doctor.[2] He won the Scottish Football League championship with Rangers in 1912–13 and a Glasgow Cup the following season and played regularly until graduating in 1916.[3][2] With World War I in full effect, he joined the London Scottish Regiment and served as a medical officer, winning the Military Cross for his bravery in action in France in 1917.[2][4] After the war ended, Paterson was posted to a Scottish hospital and played one further season with Rangers in 1919–20 (making a surprise but successful return despite being overweight and untrained), winning the championship for a second time.[2][5]

He moved to London to share a medical practice in Clapton with his brother-in-law, John L. Scott, who was also the Arsenal team doctor.[2][6] Paterson was persuaded to sign for Arsenal as an amateur and made his debut on the left wing against Derby County on 30 October 1920. Paterson became a regular fixture in the Arsenal side that season, and even played for the English Football League XI against the Scottish League XI[2] (he had been ineligible to represent Scotland due to his birthplace under the rules of the time).[6] He was out the side in 1921–22, before returning to play over 20 games in both the 1922–23 and 1923–24 seasons.[7] While he was not paid as a professional, some valuable gifts were bestowed on him during his career including a silver tea service from Rangers and a piano from Arsenal.[2]

An anecdote by the Times columnist Brian Glanville recounted how once, when given a bunch of daffodils by a girl in the crowd for one match, Paterson played on the wing with them in his hand for several minutes before finding a place to put them.[6][8]

He retired from football in the summer of 1924 to concentrate on his medical practice, only to make a surprise return to the Arsenal side two years later after being persuaded by Herbert Chapman.[2] Against Newcastle United on 13 February 1926, he scored his only ever league goal, in a 3–0 win,[6] and he then played in three FA Cup ties against Aston Villa (twice, scoring in the replay) and Swansea Town. In all he made 77 appearances for Arsenal, scoring two goals.

Paterson continued to work in medical practice until his retirement in the 1950s.[2] He died of a heart attack in 1959, aged 68.[2]
Chambre was also Warden of Merton College, Oxford, from 1525 to 1544.[1]
Military observers around the world watched closely. It appears that most of them shared Hitler's opinion, expecting that Germany would win, destroy the Soviet system, and establish a Nazi New Order in Europe.[citation needed] Very few American experts thought the Soviet Union would survive.[11] The German invasion began on 22 June 1941. Subsequently, the United States Department of War advised Franklin D. Roosevelt that the German army would conquer the Soviet Union within one to three months.[12] In July 1941 the American general staff issued memoranda to the American press that a Soviet collapse was to be expected within several weeks.[13] British analysts held similar views, believing that Germany would win within three to six weeks without heavy losses.[14] Predictions of an expected Soviet defeat had an important impact on President Roosevelt; while the United States was not at the time at war, Roosevelt favored the Allies (represented primarily at that time by the British Empire and the Soviet Union), and decided to try to avert the collapse of the USSR by extending to the Soviets (October 1941) the supply of munitions through Lend-Lease (which had started in March 1941), and also to pressure Japan not to attack while the USSR was so vulnerable. The Red Army held the line at the outskirts of Moscow (December 1941) and predictions[whose?] of Soviet collapse changed to "uncertain"[11][failed verification]
ist-Leninism is an alien doctrine imposed on the region by an imperial power whose rule is culturally repugnant to the dominated peoples. As a result, a process of organic rejection of communism by Eastern European societies—a phenomenon similar to the human body's rejection of a transplanted organ—is underway."[24]