Lave Broch is a social liberal. His opinions are for example: A living and involving democracy with openness in the government must be promoted and defended. He believes that the best society can be created if all humans are empowered and have access to high standards of welfare, education and social security. Human life and the nature is precious for him. Therefore conflict prevention or soft military peace solutions should be attempted in the worlds conflict areas. For Lave Broch international cooperation is crucial. He is a strong supporter of the UN but building an EU super state he believes is the wrong path. The EU contains little to no democracy and works for interests that are damaging to peace, welfare and the environment, which is why Denmark needs to opt out and seek a united Scandinavian/Nordic solution and EFTA membership instead. Lave Broch was also active in the Danish euro referendum and does not support that kronen (the Danish currency) is tied to the euro. And lastly Lave Broch is pro ecology and green solutions for example sustainable energy over nuclear plants and against EU initiatives that weaken national standards for organic products and the environment.[citation needed]
Lave Broch's is against the Afghanistan and Iraq wars and warned that it would lead to many civilian casualties and that no sustainable solutions were presented. He was also against the Iraq war because the lack of a UN mandate. The fight against Taliban in Afghanistan is for example wrong because the western coalition cooperates with suspected war criminals, the civil losses are too great and the use of torture as a means of interrogation. Which is why Lave Broch argues for undeniable human rights in war and any other circumstances, that cannot be bent in times of distress without consequences.[11] Lave Broch also argues that EU actions have been damaging in different conflict situations. For instance he mentions that the EU did not listen to the UN secretary general concerning the recognition of Croatia. Even though the UN secretary general warned that a fast recognition could lead to "the most terrible war" in Bosnia and Hercegovina.[12] Therefore Lave Broch would rather see issues which are currently solved by military means solved by conflict prevention and arbitration or at the very least a united UN military force, that do not promote special, national or economical interests. The first step is humanitarian aid with food, camps etc. The second step is objective UN observers in conflict zones. And the third step is negotiations.[13]

Lave Broch also opposes the EU's close connections to the European weapons industry. Where accelerating export of weapons is common practice,[14] selling weapons to dictators is common practice,[15] and the EU being the second largest exporter of weapons globally is a fact[12] according to Lave Broch.
Lave Broch would rather see a united Scandinavian/Nordic cooperation than EU and he believes that a Nordic league could be an advantage for the development in the world. The united Nordic cooperation would with a combined view on environment, legal policy, foreign policy and trade increase the collected voice of Nordic countries, BT (a daily Danish newspaper) writes about Lave Broch in an article in 2014 after a poll showed that 47% of Denmark would prefer such an arrangement.[16]
Lave Broch thinks ecology and sustainable energy is a must if future generations are to survive and in order to protect nature. This is why Lave Broch in a blog on Altinget is troubled by EU's constant invasion of national sovereignty, because in Denmark's case it weakens the current standards for no apparent reason by force undermining the Danish organic brand "Ø-mærke". In order to promote ecology the national state needs to set standards in their own pace and not by the EU lowering Danish standards.[17]
The episode is set in London in 1882. It begins with Cavis Appythart and Millward Phelps—jingle writers who decide to make their big break into musical theatre. While Millward is content to see their work featured on billboards and in newspapers, Cavis believes they can make a difference in crime-ridden London by staging a grand musical that will move the citizens to greater expressions of love. Their opportunity arises when Millward's Uncle Nezzer grants them the use of his theater on Christmas Eve. They plan the huge production of a new musical called "The Princess and the Plumber". Unfortunately, the script is not yet complete, and the premiere is only three days away.

Seymour Schwenk, their friend and an inventor, shows up in an experimental rocket car and delivers a box of light bulbs to them. Cavis maintains that if their production is glitzy and bright then it will be a bigger hit and reach more people. He plans to integrate the lights directly into the scenery itself (and, soon, the costumes as well).

However, they still have much work to do. They need to convince the city's premiere talent, Constance Effie Pickering, to star in the lead role, and they need to get a commitment from Prince Calvin Fredrick to attend the premier. While Cavis and his assistant Bob Winston work on Pickering and the Prince, Millward struggles to complete the script. Everything comes together, and Cavis starts feeling confident that their production will be a huge success. The Prince tells Pickering that her pipes are corroded they water can't drain and her toilet exploded, she's flushing in vain.

After noticing a flyer for a Christmas pageant planned to debut on the same night at a local church, Cavis goes to investigate. He observes Edmund Gilbert preparing a low-budget children's play, and concludes that it poses no threat to their grand production. However, the pageant intends to feature an object called the "Star of Christmas". Wondering aloud about this as he leaves the church, Cavis is overheard by Arthur McHollingshead. Arthur, a historian, reveals that the Star of Christmas is an ancient relic that has not been seen by the public in 79 years. He rushes off with great excitement to report the news, which promptly makes the front page headline the following morning.
However, they still have much work to do. They need to convince the city's premiere talent, Constance Effie Pickering, to star in the lead role, and they need to get a commitment from Prince Calvin Fredrick to attend the premier. While Cavis and his assistant Bob Winston work on Pickering and the Prince, Millward struggles to complete the script. Everything comes together, and Cavis starts feeling confident that their production will be a huge success. The Prince tells Pickering that her pipes are corroded they water can't drain and her toilet exploded, she's flushing in vain.

After noticing a flyer for a Christmas pageant planned to debut on the same night at a local church, Cavis goes to investigate. He observes Edmund Gilbert preparing a low-budget children's play, and concludes that it poses no threat to their grand production. However, the pageant intends to feature an object called the "Star of Christmas". Wondering aloud about this as he leaves the church, Cavis is overheard by Arthur McHollingshead. Arthur, a historian, reveals that the Star of Christmas is an ancient relic that has not been seen by the public in 79 years. He rushes off with great excitement to report the news, which promptly makes the front page headline the following morning.

Faced with the prospect of losing their audience (and in particular the Prince) to the pageant, Cavis vows to make their own production greater and flashier. But they cannot compete with the Star of Christmas, and in desperation Cavis and Millward go to the church to steal the Star. They are caught, however, and narrowly escape from the aged "Moyer the Destroyer" who was left to guard the relic. With the Star and the flashy lights, Cavis is certain that "The Princess and the Plumber" is now a guaranteed success. But during dress rehearsal, the excessive amount of lights ignite the curtains. In minutes the theater goes up in flames and with it the Star of Christmas. As they stand and rue this terrible turn of events, an officer named Dwiglight Howarde arrives with Moyer LaGumtree, and Cavis and Millward are arrested.

In the jail, they meet a scallion prisoner, Charles Pincher, who laughs at their efforts to spread love by means of an elaborate stage production. He claims that real love does not expect fame or wealth in return, that real love makes sacrifices to help others without expectation of personal gain. That kind of love, he says, is extremely rare.

Edmond and his father, Jesse, arrive at the jail to release Cavis and Millward. They have chosen not to press charges for the theft of the Star. Cavis is moved, and he expresses his desire to attend the pageant. But the pageant starts in ten minutes and there is not enough time to get there. Just then Seymour shows up in the rocket car. He entrusts Millward to drive the vehicle and try to get them all to the church on time. It is a harrowing ride fraught with collisions and near-misses, but they do arrive just as the pageant is about to start.

The pageant goes on with the Prince and Miss Pickering in attendance. Cavis finally learns that Christmas is not about glitz and grand productions; he understands that it is about Jesus. After the play, Moyer shows up and says that the real Star of Christmas is actually safe, and that they had taken the Turtle of Damascus, which most people consider a hoax. The episode ends with Cavis and Millward taking cookies and a gift to Charles Pincher in his jail cell.