Taiwan's political scene is divided into two major groups. On one side are the pan-Blues, consisting of the Chinese Nationalist Party (Kuomintang, or KMT) and two spin-off parties, the People First Party (PFP), and the New Party. Facing them are the pan-Greens, led by the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), and its ally the Taiwan Solidarity Union (TSU). Since the accession of Chen Shui-bian of the DPP to the Presidency in 2000, the Blue-controlled legislature had struggled to oust him, making changes to the impeachment process early in his administration, and attempting to recall him several times.

The latest round of recalls by the Blue side began in the summer of 2006, following a series of accusations of corruption against Chen and members of the first family. Allegations include insider trading by Chen's son-in-law, buying and selling of shares, and improper use of government funds. The recall motion was defeated due to a lack of votes.

Chen has denied any wrongdoing and not been found guilty by the Taiwanese judicial system. But his approval ratings fell, though the polls that show this is either from pro-Blue news media (which put him at about ~20%) or of completely unsupportable methodology, such as the notorious TSU poll that had him at just 5.8%. Hence, the actual extent of the decline is unknown. There have been calls from within his own party calling for his resignation, since there was some fear among the Greens that the scandals will affect the legislative election and the Presidential election in 2008.

The "Million Voices Against Corruption" campaign began in August 2006 when former DPP chairman and long-time democracy and independence activist Shih Ming-te announced that he would launch a protest campaign to force the President to resign. Shih had stepped down as chairman of the DPP in 1995, and began a long political drift from the Green side over to the Blue. According to his own version, he left the DPP in 1999, though party members said they kicked him out in 2000, blaming his grandstanding and repeated public attacks on his colleagues. In 2001 he became convener of a local pro-Blue thinktank called the Mountain Alliance, along with two other DPP turncoats, Sisy Chen and Hsu Hsin-liang. He ran unsuccessfully for mayor of Kaohsiung, garnering 1% of the vote, and also lost legislative elections in Taipei, both times running against DPP candidates. Shih's political career appeared to be in eclipse. Several years passed.

In August 2006 Shih came back to prominence. During questioning at the Presidential Office on the afternoon of 7 August 2006, the president detailed to the prosecutor how he spent the fund and presented relevant receipts and bank remittance statements.[1] On the same day, Shih Ming-te, a former ally of Chen, wrote a letter to Chen urging him to resign from office and to admit wrongdoing so as to "set a good example for the Taiwanese people". The proposal was rejected. On August 8 Shih announced his intention to open a bank account and collect NT$100 from supporters, which would be used to fund a protest in Taipei aimed at ousting the President.

Preparations
On 10 August 2006, Shih Ming-te began to plan the "Million Voices against Corruption, President Chen Must Go" campaign. Shih offered to lead the Taiwanese people in street demonstrations if he were able to raise at least 100,000,000 New Taiwan Dollars (NTD) in fundraising for his campaign.

In the meantime the Pan-Green supporters criticized the actions of Shih Ming-Te. Initially they recovered letters from his past begging the government for mercy when he was a political prisoner, but such tactics were widely seen as unseemly. More effective was the fact that Shih, supposedly battling against corruption, had personal connections to former Tuntex Group chairman Chen Yu-hao, one of the island's most famous embezzlers,[2] a connection that Shih boasts of. Chen Yu-hao is widely known to be strongly opposed to President Chen.[3] The Greens also raised questions about Shih's own finances, and made allegations that Shih was a tool of the People's Republic of China. Security agencies found no connections, however.
May 1 – The first hijacking of an American airliner – and first aircraft hijacking inside the United States – takes place, when Antulio Ramirez Ortiz, flying under the pseudonym "Elpirata Cofresi" – a reference to Puerto Rican pirate Roberto Cofresí – and armed with a gun and a steak knife, commandeers National Airlines Flight 337, a Convair CV-440 bound from Miami International Airport in Miami, Florida, to Key West, Florida, with 10 people on board. He explains that the president of the Dominican Republic, Rafael Trujillo, has offered him US$100,000 to assassinate President of Cuba Fidel Castro, and that he must fly to Havana, Cuba, to warn Castro. It is the first time that an American airliner has been forced to fly to Cuba, and surprised and confused Cuban air traffic controllers at first threaten to have the plane shot down if it enters Cuban airspace, but they eventually allow it to land at a military base outside Havana. Ortiz receives political asylum in Cuba.[9][10][11][12]
May 3 – The Boeing Airplane Company changes its name to Boeing Company.[13]
May 4 – United States Navy Commander Malcolm Ross and Lieutenant Commander Victor A. Prather set a new world balloon altitude record while testing pressure suits, ascending to 113,740 feet (34,668 meters) over the Gulf of Mexico in a helium balloon before making a planned landing at sea. A helicopter retrieves Ross from the water and transports him safely to the anti-submarine warfare carrier USS Antietam (CVS-36), but Prather subsequently slips from a helicopter's sling and drowns after his pressure suit floods.[14]
May 10 – A United States Air Force B-58 Hustler sets a record for sustained supersonic flight, flying 669.4 miles (1,077.9 km) in 30 minutes 45 seconds at an average speed of 1,302 miles per hour (1,132 knots; 2,097 km/hr).[2] Its pilot, Major Elmer E. Murphy, will receive the Aéro-Club de France′s Blériot Cup for the flight.[2]
May 18 – In Operation Sageburner, a United States Navy McDonnell F4H-1F Phantom II fighter (BuNo. 145316) is destroyed trying to set the low-altitude speed record, the aircraft coming apart at high speed due to a pitch bellows failure which causes a pilot-induced oscillation (PIO).
May 22[15] or 24 – To celebrate the 50th anniversary of naval aviation in the United States, five United States Navy McDonnell F4H-1F Phantom II fighters fly across the United States in less than three hours in Operation LANA. The fastest, flown by Lieutenants Richard F. Gordon, Jr., (pilot) and Bobbie Long [16] (radar intercept officer), sets a new record for a transcontinental flight across the United States, flying from Ontario, California, to Floyd Bennett Field in New York City in 2 hours 47 minutes at an average speed of 869.74 mph (1,400.28 km/h) with three in-flight refuelings.[15] They receive the 1961 Bendix Trophy for their flight.
May 26 – A U.S. Air Force B-58 Hustler flies from New York City to Paris in a record 3 hours, 19 minutes, 41 seconds, covering the 4,612-mile (7,427-km) distance at an average speed of 1,386 miles per hour (1,205 knots; 2,232 km/hr).[2] Its crew will receive the Mackay Trophy for the flight.[2]
May 30 – Viasa Flight 897, a Douglas DC-8-53, crashes in the Atlantic Ocean during a flight from Lisbon, Portugal, to Santa Maria Island in the Azores, killing all 61 people on board.
Shih Ming-te called for various prominent Taiwanese (Republic of China) politicians to join in demonstrating for the resignation of Chen Shui-bian. However, although the demonstration was attended by all the major Blue politicians, no prominent Green politicians appeared.